Hello everyone, and welcome to another episode of AvFacts, the podcast about all things aviation. Big or small, airplane or helicopter, civilian or military, I cover it all, as long as it's interesting. I want to apologize for the wait; I know we're all stuck inside and you'd think that would help me release episodes even more frequently, but apparently that's not the case. But regardless, I'm here now, and ready to talk about jet engines. Let's dive in.

Virtually every internal combustion engine uses the four-cycle process we're all familiar with: Induction, compression, combustion, and exhaust. Or, as it's often explained: Suck, squeeze, bang, blow. In a piston engine, those four steps all occur inside of a cylinder, and the expanding gases from the combustion are used to drive a piston, which turns a crankshaft. The piston cylinder is genius in its operation, but there's still a lot of energy wasted in driving the piston, the valves, the crankshaft, and everything else.

Even as far back as the invention of the internal combustion engine, engineers knew it would be more efficient if you could arrange all four steps of the internal combustion process in a straight line. In 1931, Italian aeronautical engineer Secondo Campini proposed the first viable jet engine, which he called the _thermo-jet_. He began making his first prototypes in 1934, and in 1940, the Caproni Campini N.1 became the first successful jet aircraft.

Like all jet engines, The Campini N.1's engine had the four stages of internal combustion -- induction, compression, combustion, and exhaust -- all arranged in a straight line. The engine takes air in through the front, uses a compressor fan to compress it, injects fuel and combusts it, and the expanding hot gases are expelled through the rear to generate reaction thrust. The Campini N.1 was powered by a **motorjet** engine -- that's a jet engine where the compressor fan is driven by a piston engine; in this case, a 900-horsepower V12.

Obviously, using a piston engine to power a jet engine isn't very practical. The Campini N.1's engine wasn't really intended to be practical; it was just meant to demonstrate that jet engines were possible. Regardless, the achievement was celebrated publicly -- the Italian _Regia Aeronautica_ was unusually open about its research and accomplishments.

The Italians' claim to the flying the first jet aircraft was short-lived, as all the while, the Germans had been developing jet engine technology in extreme secrecy. In August of 1939, prior to the Campini N.1's first flight, the Germans had actually already flown the first true jet aircraft, the Heinkel He 178, only days before German invaded Poland at the start of World War II.

The He 178 was powered by a **turbojet engine**, a jet engine where the compressor is driven by a turbine, which is turned by the exhaust gases. The compressor and turbine are connected by a spool. As expanding hot gases exit the combustor, the turbine spins, in turn spinning the compressor and sustaining the propulsion process. The He 178 was a technical marvel but impractical as an aircraft, with only 10 minutes of combat endurance and a limited top speed.

Through the war, the Germans continued to spearhead jet engine technology, creating the world's first operational jet fighter, the Messerschmitt Me 262 _Schwalbe_. The Me 262 was faster than any Allied aircraft, but Germany's ability to manufacture complex jet engines was falling apart towards the end of the war, and fortunately, the Me 262 was too late to change the course of history.

Following the end of World War II, the 1950s saw an explosion in jet aircraft, both civilian and military. Passenger jets opened up transcontinental travel with much better reliability, and both the US and Soviet Union built supersonic jet fighters and nuclear jet bombers during Cold War.

I've discussed the motorjet and the turbojet, but what about the turbofan? What's that all about? Turbofan engines had been conceived around the same time as turbojets, but it wasn't until the 1950s that turbojet engineering was sufficiently advanced that turbofans could be built.

A turbofan is simply a turbojet that powers a ducted fan. The turbojet in this case is called the **core**, and the ducted fan is called the **bypass**. As you may recall, in a turbojet, a spool connects the compressor and the turbine, allowing the turbine to drive the compressor. In a turbofan engine, the turbine also drives a larger fan, which pushes air into the compressor, and also the bypass. Air going through the ducted bypass goes around the turbojet core, but not in it. The ratio of air going through the bypass instead of the core is called the **bypass ratio**. The bigger the fan and the smaller the compressor, the bigger the bypass ratio.

Why might you do this? Turbojet engines get a lot hotter than they need to be for the amount of thrust they produce, and they accelerate all that hot air out the back in a tight stream. Accelerating a small amount of very hot air very very quickly to produce thrust is a lot less efficient than accelerating a large amount of cooler air a smaller amount. The larger fan accelerates a large volume of air by a small amount, increasing efficiency, especially at slower speeds.

Turbofans can be low-bypass or high-bypass. Low-bypass turbofans are closer to turbojets, with fans not much bigger than the core. They are used on fast aircraft, like fighter jets, where the core provides most of the thrust and the fan provides a smaller amount. High-bypass turbofans are closer to propeller engines, with large, slower-moving fans. They are used on passenger aircraft where fuel efficiency is more important than speed. In a high-bypass turbofan, the core provides a small amount of thrust, and the fan provides the bulk of it.

The simplest turbofan engine is called a single-shaft turbofan. In a single-shaft turbofan, the fan is driven by the same spool that connects the compressor and the turbine. It's the simplest turbofan, but very few modern aircraft use a single-shaft turbofan.

Much more common is a two-spool turbofan. In this configuration, a high-pressure turbine spins the compressor, and a low-pressure turbine spins the fan. The two shafts are concentric -- in other words, one is inside the other.

To further increase the pressure ratio of the engine, some two-spool turbofans add another compressor between the fan and the compressor. This intermediate-pressure compressor boosts the air before it enters the high-pressure compressor, which raises overall pressure in the engine. The higher pressure increases efficiency, generating more thrust for the same amount of fuel. Most of the giant jet engines on modern American twin-engine passenger jets, like the 777 and the 787, are boosted two-spools.

The Brits took it a step further with the three-spool engine, popularized by Rolls-Royce. In a three-spool engine, the intermediate-pressure compressor gets its own spool and its own intermediat-pressure turbine. So now you got three compressors (including the fan) in the front, and three turbines in the back. And all of those are connected by three concentric shafts. With three separate compressors and three separate turbines, the size of the turbine and compressor blades can be set by the engineers to run at the most optimal ratios to one another. This further increases efficiency, but at the cost of complexity and price.

Using different turbines to spin each compressor section at its optimal speed is smart, but it becomes a problem for the fan. The fan is very large, and so it has to spin very slowly to be most efficient. This requires that the low-pressure turbine spin very slowly too, since the two are connected by a shaft. Therefore, the low-pressure turbines need to be in much slower exhaust air. In order to provide enough power to spin the fan at that speed, engineers need to add lots of low-pressure turbines to extract enough energy from the slower exhaust air.

An alternative approach to solving the fan efficiency problem is to use a geared fan. That way, the fan can be spun by the fast-moving high-pressure turbines, and a planetary reduction gearbox keeps the fan spinning at a slower, more efficient speed. The new A320neo and Embraer E-jets use geared turbofans.

Reducing costs with engine efficiency is becoming more and more important for the airlines, and so turbofan cores are getting smaller and smaller, and the fans are getting larger. Turbofan fuel efficiency stands at around 40% right now, and manufacturers are pushing towards 60%. Some of these next-generation jet engines are **propfans**, which look more like propeller airplanes, with open rotors. Others depart from the normal four-step internal combustion process, and instead use exotic cycles like the Brayton cycle or constant-volume combustion. The Rolls-Royce UltraFan, under development now, has a giant 15-to-1 bypass ratio and variable-pitch fan blades: In other words, the fan blades can twist to achieve the best angle of attack for takeoff, cruise, and landing.

Thanks for listening to another, long-awaited episode of AvFacts! Join me next time when I will be talking about aircraft carrier recoveries: How they're flown, what an LSO does, and how they're graded. Until then, thanks for listening, and stay curious.
